I wanted to do
a video about a concept
which I’ve been calling the illusion of improvement.
This idea is about a kind of a philosophical question,
which is can it be possible
for every single individual in a society
to be getting richer over time,
and yet for society as a whole and for families as a whole
to be getting poorer over time?
And this is an important concept,
I think, because
in my opinion, definitely people in this country,
the UK and many Western countries
have been getting continually poorer
for at least the last 20 years or so.
And yet if you look at most individuals,
you will find that over time
they do tend to get richer over time.
And that is because in most careers
you get salary rises as you get older
and many people are able
to accumulate a little bit of cash and buy property,
which makes them richer over time.
So how is it possible that these two things
simultaneously are happening,
that individuals are getting richer
and yet society as a whole is getting poorer?
So I think the best way to explain
what's happening here is through a graph.
Now, we don't do many graphs or diagrams of this channel,
but I think this diagram here expands really nicely
what is happening.
So on this graph,
you've got time on the x axis
and you got living standards on the Y axis.
So what you have is four separate generations over time.
And if you look at these four generations, you can see
each generation over time is getting richer,
but their children
are also getting richer over time,
but from a lowest scoring point
and reaching a lower end point.
So each generation over time is getting poorer,
but each individual person is getting richer.
And I think this describes really well
what is happening now.
And the reason I wanted to talk about
this is because another thing
which I've been talking about on the channel
is we have seen in the last
15, 20 well, to be honest,
30 or 40 years a very aggressive increase
in house prices and other asset prices.
And I suspect we will see very aggressive
house prices in the next few years.
Now, what is interesting about this is this
this economic action, the increase of house
prices,
it really bankrupts families over time
because each generation finds it
harder and harder to buy a house.
They have to pay more rent.
They have to pay more interest
because they need bigger mortgages.
But if you look at individual people,
they will normally tell you when house prices rise,
it's good for me.
So we have an action which is impoverishing families.
And yet most individuals within those families
think this is good for me.
So I think it's really important
for people to understand this diagram, essentially.
What is important to understand
is if you want to understand how your family is doing,
how your community is doing, how your society is doing
financially, it's not enough to look at just yourself
and your path over time,
or even you and your kids and your path over time.
What you need to do is compare
your kids to you at their age
and your grandkids at their age.
So if we go back to the graph,
if you look at the living standards for young people,
so I'll put XXXX’s in the graph here,
which marks each generation when they were young,
And you can see that each generation
when they were young is getting poorer over time.
If we do the same thing for middle age again, middle aged
people are getting poorer over time.
The elderly again getting poorer over time,
despite the fact that each individual generation
is getting richer over time.
It's very important that you do this
if you want to understand
the future of your family and your communities,
you need to compare generations
when they were the same age.
So I think
once we understand
this, we can start to sort of
get rid of the division,
which is increasingly happening
between elderly and the young when it comes to voting.
I think elderly people see that
their lives are getting better over time.
They assume their kids lives will get better over time.
And they fail to realise that despite things like
increasing house prices which
benefit them but hurt their kids,
the long term trajectory,
the long term
trajectory for their family, for their kids,
for their community is increased poverty over time.
Now, that raises an interesting question,
which is well,
if all families, or the vast
majority of families are being poorer over time,
but society as a whole is not getting
poorer, GDP is not decreasing,
then where is all of that missing wealth going?
And to explain that, we're going to add
one other line on this graph here,
which is the living standards of the rich over time.
So as ordinary families are getting poorer,
they're losing their wealth,
the rich are getting richer at the fastest rate
ever in history and their living standards
are dramatically increasing.
So what we have
is quite an interesting situation,
which is from a class perspective, ordinary families
are basically being impoverished by the very rich,
but the rich are able to convince ordinary families
that they're getting better
by creating this illusion of improvement,
which is every single generation, year by year,
feels like they're getting richer and every family
generation by generation is being made poorer.
So that's it basically.
This is the illusion of improvement.
It's really important to understand this
because in the next 10, 20 years,
house prices are going to go through the roof,
and especially of older generations
who maybe own property
are going to feel that they're winning
and they're often going to fail to realise
that the consequence is their kids
and their grandkids are being made poorer.
If we can get enough people to recognise this,
then we can get together. We can say we don't accept this.
We don't accept the situation
where wealth flows from ordinary families
to the very rich, where living standards
continue to decrease over time.
If we don't realise this,
then it will happen and we will fall into a situation
where the vast majority of families
fall into poverty over time.
We can reverse it.
The only way to do that
is by making rich people pay their fair share
instead of taxing
everybody who's working hard for their money.
We're going to keep pushing for it. We hope you support us.
Watch this video again.
Share it with your friends, Share it with your family.
Send it to your mum, send it to your nan.
Let's fight back.
Let's not accept poverty for ordinary people. Thank you.